>> A groundbreaking recent
discovery of a huge fossilized
skull in China has archeologists
embroiled in heated debate.
Is this extraordinary
finding evidence
of a new human species?
This is Gaia News.
[THEME MUSIC]
Over the last several
decades, the view
of human evolution during
the past half a million years
has become ever more complicated
with the regular additions
to the list of human
species that lived
during the Pleistocene period.
Working out the relationship
between these populations
of early humans and how
they relate to modern humans
has proven difficult, and
at times, contentious.
The new finding in China is one
of the more recent additions
to the growing debate.
Andrew Collins is an
ancient history researcher
who has been closely
following these discoveries.
>> An incredible discovery
has been made in China.
And this is of a fairly
massive human skull.
It's around 140,000 years old.
The first thing
that they notice is
that it's got features which
are in common with Homo
sapiens, that's
ourselves, but also
what they call archaic humans.
In other words, those types of
humans that were in the past
and don't quite exist today.
And it had, for instance,
these massive brow ridges.
It was incredibly wide.
The size of the skull
was quite massive.
And the nose, how was it was
incredibly large as well.
>> The Chinese team did
a statistical analysis
and concluded that it was unlike
any other skull that's ever
been found, essentially
deeming it a new species.
They named it Homo
Longi, which translates
to Dragon Man for the region
in which it was found.
Despite the dramatic
announcement,
most researchers
in the West have
cast doubt on the
assessment, claiming
there isn't enough
evidence to convince them
that this skull
represents a new species.
Many have an alternate theory.
>> Most of the Western
scientists have now found out
about the skull and have
been asked to comment,
are almost unanimous that
it's not a new species,
that what it is, is a
skull of a Denisovan.
And the Denisovans are this
branch of the human family
tree, if you like,
that have similarities
with the Neanderthals,
but was spread mostly
in the eastern part of
the Eurasian continent.
We found evidence of them, a
place called the Denisova Cave
in Siberia.
We found evidence of them
on the Tibetan Plateau.
And many of the
paleoanthropologists
are now looking at
the Dragon Man skull
and saying that is the
face of a Denisovan.
>> Just who were the Denisovans?
>> Well, we didn't know
anything about them until 2010.
And at that time, a
small finger the bomb
that was found in
the Denisova Cave
in Siberia, which
was a site that's
been occupied for hundreds
of thousands of years
from about 400,000 years
forwards was examined.
And it was found to
belong to a type of human
which we'd not seen before.
It wasn't Homo sapiens,
it wasn't Neanderthal,
it was something
completely different.
And when the so-called genome
was extracted from this finger
bone, it was found that a small
percentage of this Denisovan
DNA was present in a whole
number of modern populations.
Now, when we look on
the Dragon Man skull,
we can say that this has
all of the different traits
and attributes that suggest
to us that this is a Denisovan
skull.
>> To researchers
like Andrew Collins,
there is great significance
in this finding.
>> One of the important things
about the discovery of this new
skull is that it allows us to
see a facet of ourself within
this discovery in the sense that
not only does it have so-called
archaic features, but there are
traits here of modern humans.
And that's significant
because if it is Denisovan,
then the Denisovans of the
Denisova Cave in Siberia
were incredibly sophisticated.
They were, in many
ways, our forerunners.
And there is a good chance
that the technologies
of the Denisovans were passed
on to our own direct ancestors
when we reached the
same region, probably
around 45,000 years
ago, and encountered
the last of the Denisovans,
that they gave us
their technologies.
>> These technologies included
advanced stone tool, jewelry,
and clothing-making techniques,
and possibly even horseback
riding.
All these were
previously attributed
to people of the Bronze Age
nearly 500,000 years later.
>> And the conventional views of
archeology is that we invented
all of these things ourselves
ad-hoc, independently,
here and there, across
the Eurasian continents.
But it seems as if all of
this came from the Denisovans.
That's what the evidence
is coming out of,
the Denisova Cave
in Siberia, that all
of this, this whole package, if
you like, of human technology
was already in place
amongst the Denisovans
and they gave it to us.
>> For Andrew Collins, there
is another major implication
of this new discovery.
>> One of the most important
things about this new discovery
is the massive size of the skull
because it confirms to us that
the Denisovans, who almost
certainly is a representative
of, were huge.
And if that's
solid, then we could
be looking on the face
of a giant, basically.
Somebody who was perhaps
as tall as around 7 feet,
and confirms to us the fact that
giants existed in this world
in the past.
People like myself,
and my colleagues
have been trying
to site for years
that now there is evidence
of some kind of human group
that was of immense size.
Almost certainly linked
with the Denisovans,
that existed in the past.
So finally, we have evidence
that there were giants
in the Earth in the past.
>> Researchers will surely
continue to debate the true
origins of this new finding.
Hopefully bringing
us one step closer
to a fuller understanding
of our own origins.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.